What I see from your White Hellion work, Matt, is that in contrast to, let's say Peter Rollins or
even Jack, kind of the apathetic theology, it seems so much of their theology is focused on
negativity and probably makes sense given their Hegelians, the negative aspect of God or like
the self-divided God. Whereas I do see, and it's in many ways, you know, in like our kind of like
post-modern kind of culture, this is a breath of fresh air that Whitehead, he in fact, he asserts,
he puts forward a positive philosophy through especially the ideas of like creativity and
imagination, which is a big thing for you. So, well, what really is that kind of positive orientation
in Whiteheadian process theology, would you say, in contrast to more of the kind of the negative
apathetic theology that we hear more from the Jackians in our times?
I think, you know, it's very, I don't know if this is intentional on your part or if you know
much about Shelling's positive philosophy, which was his late philosophical contribution at the
University of Berlin after Hegel's death, where, you know, this connects to process theology
and Whitehead's work as well, where Shelling basically looked back at his own earlier work
and the work of Hegel and criticized it as a form of negative philosophy, which
was merely conceptual. And if it were to have been more upfront about the fact that it's merely
conceptual, it wouldn't be a problem. But he thinks, you know, he's very critical in particular
of Hegel's attempt to transition from the logic to the philosophy of nature, where there's this
sense in which the logic just freely releases itself into actual existence. And, you know,
Shelling just didn't see how one could make that transition from the process of negation by which
this dialectical logic could unfold to actual positive existence. And, you know, Kierkegaard was
at Shelling's late lectures, and many of Kierkegaard's critiques of Hegel come straight out of
Shelling's late criticisms. And what Shelling wanted to offer as a remedy to this situation,
because he admitted his own earlier philosophy was also a negative philosophy in the sense that it,
you know, was relying too much on the conceptual activity of negation
in an attempt to derive actual knowledge, where what Shelling wanted to seek in his late philosophy
was a more existential relationship to actual existence. And he called it a kind of metaphysical
empiricism, where we're not so much concerned with what the structure, the conceptual structure
of reality is. We're more concerned with the fact that anything exists at all. And, you know, he says
that the fact that anything exists at all cannot be explained rationally would be his claim that
there's something unprethinkable or un-oprioriable about just the sheer fact of existence. And so,
I mean, I think we can safely say that existentialism is kind of born in these late lectures of Shelling's.
And, you know, he also frames this as a kind of
critique of feeling, Shelling does. And he says, he makes this interesting comment. I think I
mentioned it in my book about how Yakkant tried to do in his third critique, this examination,
a transcendental examination of feeling and esthesis and so on. But, you know, he didn't follow
through fully and he discovered things in that final critique of judgment, as I said earlier,
about the living world, but also about aesthetics and our relationship to the sublime and so on,
that in many ways undermined some of the systematic claims he made in his first critique.
And so, you know, Shelling just drops this hint about that we still need a critique of feeling.
And Whitehead later in Process and Reality, I don't, I'm pretty sure, I'm almost certain he
didn't read these late lectures of Shelling's. I know he had read at least some excerpts of Shelling's
in a book by a Russian philosopher named Velosky, so he was aware of Shelling.
But he almost certainly didn't read these late lectures on positive philosophy.
But Whitehead says, again, in response to Kant, that he wants to replace this critique of pure
reason with a critique of pure feeling. And his whole process philosophy is an attempt
to do so. And he also says, you know, in the first critique of pure reason,
Kant has these 20 pages on the transcendental aesthetic, where he, you know, articulates
his view of space and time as forms of our own intuition. And Whitehead says,
his whole book should have been about that, and not just this quick little 20 page aside.
You mentioned crossing the threshold, yeah.
Yeah, exactly. And so, you know, and then basically Whitehead's philosophy of organism
in the final interpretation ends up being a lot like absolute idealism,
in terms of the relationship between God and the world and the human
self-consciousness and the divine. But as he himself puts it, he's putting
philosophy on a realistic basis instead of an idealistic basis, because he's not
doing philosophy in an attempt to build up this hierarchy of categories of thought,
he says, but rather a hierarchy of feeling. And once to root all of our human knowing,
thinking activity and our knowledge in a kind of, I think of him as basically saying that knowledge
itself is a form of feeling. Our conceptual activity, conceptual prehension in his terms,
is a form of feeling, just we're feeling possibilities rather than feeling actualities.
And so he wants to put reason and mind back in the world, back in the body,
and put the body back in the context of a living universe. And so in this context, you know, positive
philosophy is another way of thinking about this recharged form of empiricism.
Shelling called it metaphysical empiricism. William James, very influential for Whitehead,
called it radical empiricism, where it's not that Whitehead wasn't aware of the importance
of negation in the context of logical dialectics, but he accepts this pragmatist critique of
idealistic philosophy and really wants our concepts to be adequate to experience and
applicable to experience and, yeah, pragmatically useful. And like the test of any concept
for Whitehead is, well, to what extent does it elucidate our experience, including our practical
experience? So, yeah, hopefully, hopefully that gets at this question of the shift from the negative
to the positive. Most certainly does, most certainly does. And in fact, just to answer your
question, Matt, but I'm aware of Shelling's late lectures. The answer is no, because my only
education of Shelling is from Frederick Beyser, and this great guy on the internet called Footnotes
to Play Doh. So I need to, I probably need to, well, do you know what those lectures are called?
I just, I just, I may just call Shelling's late lectures or? The grounding of positive
philosophy. I mean, so only, only, only some of those lectures have been translated up to this
point into English. I don't know if you read German. I don't, I don't, I'm working on it,
but I don't, I don't yet have the ability to really study the original. But SUNY, the State
University of New York has published a lot of Shelling's late lectures. And under the title,
The Grounding of Positive Philosophy, Bruce Matthews is the translator. They've also,
SUNY has published some of his Philosophy of Mythology. I think it's under the title,
The Historical Critical Introduction to the Philosophy of Mythology.
So that's what's available in English at this point. Yeah. And these, these were all lectures
he gave in the University of Berlin beginning in 1841, I believe. Yeah.
Excellent. Excellent. If I could find that, I'll leave a link down below in the description.